---
title: Mops and OOP
layout: layouts/manual.njk
tags: ["manual", "tutorial"]

---

Armed with a basic knowledge of Mops' stack, you're now ready for an
introduction to the language's real power; its OOP (Object-Oriented
Programming) nature.

OOP is such a popular topic these days that a long introduction is
probably unnecessary, so this introduction will be fairly brief.

The primary terms to concern yourself with at this point are:

-   CLASS
-   METHOD
-   OBJECT
-   INHERITANCE
-   MESSAGE
-   SELECTOR

To help you visualize the "big picture" of an object oriented system
and what the relationships are among all the parts, we'll use an
analogy.

Methods and Inheritance
-----------------------

Let's say you want to hire an accountant to prepare your income tax
return.

As a class of professionals, all accountants have a certain basic
knowledge about accounting and manipulating figures. It is their
fundamental job to adhere to generally accepted accounting principles
when working on the financial records of a client. The methods they all
use include calculating figures, cross-footing entries, checking
calculations a second time, placing parentheses around negative numbers
in a ledger, and so on.

But within that universe of all accountants, there are specialists. Some
devote themselves to corporate tax work, others to accounting for
self-employed professionals, such as doctors. No matter what the
specialty, each shares the same fundamental knowledge of accounting as
their colleagues in other specialties. That is, by virtue of being
related to the class of accountants in general, they inherit many of the
characteristics of all accountants. Most of their methods may even be
the same, such as double-checking figures, using parentheses, and the
like. But some of their methods may be different. For example, one kind
of accountant may specialize in handling financial records for
corporations whose annual sales are in excess of five-million dollars.
Another subgroup may do all kinds of accounting work, but its methods
involve calculating the final tax form on a computer instead of
calculating and writing entries by hand. In the case of each of these
subgroups, their predominant methods are the same, but with minor
variations in certain methods. Therefore, while each subgroup, or
subclass of specialty accountants is a class unto itself, each retains
many ties to the larger class of all accountants.

A yet smaller segment of a subclass of accountants, however, can have
its own special methods. For example, there could be a small subclass
(actually a subclass of a subclass) of computerized accountants who
bring a portable computer along and perform the work only at the
client's place of business. But even this sub-subclass can trace its
methods back through all levels of the class hierarchy, which might look
like this:

![](/pmops/ClassHierarchy.png "ClassHierarchy.png")

Objects and Messages
--------------------

So far, we've been talking only about classes of accountants, not the
actual people who do the work. The accountant you select to do your
taxes, say his name is John, would fall into one of the subclasses that
best meets your particular tax needs.

For the sake of this example, Let's say that John is a member of the
class of accountants that works with family tax planning and tax return
preparation. In other words, John is an "instance", or an actual,
physical example (an object) of the class of family tax accountants.
When you summon John to do your taxes, he automatically brings with him
the ability to perform all the accounting and tax preparation methods
that belong to the specialty subclass he belongs to, as well as all the
methods he inherits by belonging to a hierarchy of accountant classes.
He may not have to summon absolutely every method for your tax job, but
they're in his background just the same.

![](/pmops/MethodInheritance.png "MethodInheritance.png")

To get John going on your tax return, you give him the appropriate
instructions, including all the figures he needs and the final go ahead.
In other words, you give him the message, prepare the tax return based
on my figures.

When John receives this message, he knows that the figures you provide
are the parameters to be passed to the methods he will be using to
calculate your taxes. He also knows, according to the methods in his
background, that prepare the tax return; means he should do
certain things, like organize the figures, obtain copies of each tax
form necessary, and so on. The prepare the tax return part of
the message is a selector in that it tells John what method (of the many
methods in his background) to proceed with first. Even within that very
first method he performs, some of the individual steps, such as
organizing the figures, may be inherited from the superclass of all
accountants. One or more of those steps, however, may be unique to his
subclass of family tax preparers.

Now, let's say that at the office you are responsible for hiring an
accountant to do the company tax return. Because John is a specialist in
family tax planning, you wouldn't want to select him. Instead, you hire
Marvin, because he comes from a class of corporate tax accountants.

To Marvin, you give almost the same message: prepare the tax return
based on the corporate figures. Marvin receives the same message as
John, but because the methods in Marvin's class are not identical to
John's, a different process takes place in the preparation of the
return. Some of Marvin's steps may be the same as John's, because they
share the same steps with all accountants, but others will be unique to
Marvin's subclass. And the corporate figures you give Marvin, even
though many will have the same names as the personal figures (income,
medical expenses, tax credits, interest deductions), there will be no
confusion between returns. Only your family's figures will be in
John's return; only the corporate figures will be in Marvin's. Despite
John's and Marvin's common heritage of accounting methods, they work
completely independently of each other.

The same would be true if you hired a colleague of John's class to
prepare your mother's tax return. If his name is Percival, you can give
Percival the same message and your mother's figures, and there would be
no interference among the three returns you have in the works.

If this accountant example were a true object oriented system, the class
of all accountants would itself be based on another all-encompassing
superclass, something like "all living beings". In other words, there
must be a primeval class from which all classes are derived, and all the
primeval methods apply down the line, as long as they haven't been
modified by a subclass. Therefore, even though John doesn't think about
it, he breathes, his heart beats regularly, he seeks nutrition
periodically, and so on. If you send the message John, hold your breath
for 15 seconds, the method for breathing would not be found in either of
the accountant classes to which John belongs, but rather in the primeval
class of living beings. It's possible, nonetheless, for John to reach
back through the hierarchy of classes to that primeval class and make a
change to the method that controls his breathing.

Let's take another look at what we've just covered.

Classes and subclasses are defined by the methods that dictate how an
object is to behave. A subclass inherits all the methods of its
superclass, and adds to (or if necessary, modifies) the superclass'
list of methods. An object is a singular instance of a class or
subclass. An object is capable of performing all operations specified by
methods in its class and its Superclass.

For an object to do any work, it requires that a message be sent to it.
The message must contain a selector, which the object matches with one
of its possible methods. Any data (parameters) passed to the object
inside the message remain the private property of that object (and are
not generally accessible from outside the object).

Looking at the following diagram, when we send the message, John,
prepare tax return with my figures, John matches the selector prepare
tax return with the methods in Class Family Accountants:

![](/pmops/MatchSelector.png "MatchSelector.png")

This method is, in turn, defined by a method from its own class (*e.g.*,
Personal Consultation) and by methods that the subclass inherits from
its superclass (*e.g.*, Verify Receipts, Doublecheck Figures, and Fill
Out Form 1040).

When you send the same selector to Percival, but with your mother's
figures, Percival follows the same procedures as John, but never sees
your figures, which John has to himself:

![](/pmops/InheritMethod.png "InheritMethod.png")


