---
title: About
layout: layouts/default.njk
---

**Mops** is a full featured, stand-alone development environment for
programming the Macintosh written by *Mike Hore*. Inspired by Smalltalk
and the commercial language Neon, Mops is based on Forth with extended
object-oriented features such as multiple inheritance, early and late
binding, persistent objects, and garbage collection. Its interactive
development environment provides for fluid and productive programming by
allowing quick testing and modification of small code segments.

Mops comes with a large class library supporting many Smalltalk-like
classes such as containers and all of the normal Mac graphical user
interface elements. There is seamless integration of Macintosh Toolbox
calls. AltiVec and external frameworks such as OpenGL and Mach-O are
also supported. Included is the complete source code and a well-written
manual, which is useful for the novice or expert.

Mops is Carbon-compliant and runs under Mac OS 9.x and all Mac OS X
versions released to date. It is a subroutine threaded, optimizing Forth
compiler (transparent to the programmer) resulting in programs that run
very quickly. Over seventeen years since its inception, the program is
still actively maintained by the original author along with a corps of
dedicated volunteers.

## iMops

As an offspring of PowerMops, **iMops** is an X86-64 native implementation
of Mops language for Mac OS X. It is also a subroutine threaded,
optimizing Forth compiler and linked with Cocoa/Objective-C.

## aMops

Current development is happening on the **aMops** code generator,
to bring the Mops language to ARM-based computers.

Even if you never thought you had a reason to try something different,
Mops might be just what you are looking for!
